Added documentation on how to create a route in an add-on (#7063)
plone/volto: docs/how-to-guides/routes.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "How to create a route in Seven"
    "property=og:description": "How to create a route in Seven"
    "property=og:title": "How to create a route in Seven"
    "keywords": "Seven, frontend, Plone, routes"
---

# Create a route in Seven

Seven is built on top of React and React Router 7.

> You declare new routes in Seven in add-ons, using the [add-ons configuration loader](https://plone-registry.readthedocs.io/conceptual-guides/add-on-loader.html#add-ons-configuration-loader).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You declare new routes in your add-ons for Seven using the [add-ons configuration loader from `@plone/registry`](https://plone-registry.readthedocs.io/conceptual-guides/add-on-loader.html#add-ons-configuration-loader).
```

Routes are registered using the `config.registerRoute()` API from `@plone/registry`.

### Conventions

To promote clarity and modularity, it is recommended that **all route components in add-ons be placed in a `routes/` directory** in your add-on.

The `file` property in each route must be a **fully qualified module path** (e.g., `@my-addon/routes/MyView.tsx`), so that the application can resolve and load the component correctly at runtime.

### `route` – Standard route

Used to define a route for a specific path.

```ts
config.registerRoute({
  type: 'route',
  path: '/login',
  file: '@plone/cmsui/routes/login.tsx',
  options: {
    id: 'login',
    index: true,
  },
});
```

### `layout` – Layout with children

Useful for defining shared page layouts for a set of routes.

```ts
config.registerRoute({
  type: 'layout',
  file: '@my-addon/routes/layouts/DashboardLayout.tsx',
  children: [
    {
      type: 'route',
      path: 'home',
      file: '@my-addon/routes/DashboardHome.tsx',
    },
    {
      type: 'route',
      path: 'settings',
      file: '@my-addon/routes/DashboardSettings.tsx',
    },
  ],
});
```

### `index` – Default route in a context

> Rendered when no sub-route is matched. Must be placed inside a `layout` or `prefix`.

Author: The example ilustrates this... If someone needs more background, then they read the RR7 docs.

> Rendered when no sub-route is matched. Must be placed inside a `layout` or `prefix`.

Author: The example below ilustrates this... If someone needs more background, then they read the RR7 docs.

> Rendered when no sub-route is matched. Must be placed inside a `layout` or `prefix`.

Reviewer: Huh? How does it illustrate it? There is no mention of `layout` or `prefix` in the following example.

If people don't understand, then "RTFD" is poor guidance, and you should at least provide a link to the specific section so people can understand.

> Rendered when no sub-route is matched. Must be placed inside a `layout` or `prefix`.

Author: @stevepiercy to fully understand it, the reader MUST learn how RR7 routes work. Maybe we have to be more clear about this. How they do work, it's documented in the framework website docs.

Remember where we said to stick to the ecosystem and frameworks standards, so we don't have to document everything to the last comma and period?

> Rendered when no sub-route is matched. Must be placed inside a `layout` or `prefix`.

Reviewer: Once more, with emphasis.

> If people don't understand, then "RTFD" is poor guidance, and you should at least _provide a link to the specific section_ so people can understand.

Clearly that is exactly what is happening here, but you won't give a link to that specific section. In this page https://reactrouter.com/start/data/routing, there is one instance of "inside", and that doesn't make sense with the current wording of this sentence or the code example. If you're talking about _nesting_, then rewrite it to be _explicitly_ about nesting, both in narrative text and longer code samples. For example, from the docs:

https://reactrouter.com/start/data/routing#nested-routes

> Routes can be nested inside parent routes through `children`.

```ts
import { Outlet } from "react-router";

export default function Dashboard() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Dashboard</h1>
      {/* will either be <Home> or <Settings> */}
      <Outlet />
    </div>
  );
}
```

The following route registration defines the `/edit` interface in Seven.
This example demonstrates how to nest a `prefix` route under a `layout`, and use both `index` and wildcard routes within the same branch.

```ts
config.registerRoute({
  type: 'layout',
  file: '@plone/cmsui/routes/layout.tsx',
  children: [
    {
      type: 'prefix',
      path: 'edit',
      children: [
        {
          type: 'index',
          file: '@plone/cmsui/routes/edit.tsx',
          options: {
            id: 'index-edit',
          },
        },
        {
          type: 'route',
          path: '*',
          file: '@plone/cmsui/routes/edit.tsx',
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
});
```

### What this defines:

- A top-level layout component from `@plone/cmsui/routes/layout.tsx`.
- A `prefix` path `edit` that groups all `/edit/*` routes.
- An `index` route for `/edit`.
- A wildcard route for any `/edit/*` subpath.

```{note}
Even though both the `index` and `*` routes use the same file, you could conditionally render different content based on `useParams()` or other context inside the component.
```

---

### File structure for `@plone/cmsui` edit route

```
@plone/cmsui/
├── routes/

> │   ├── layout.tsx       ← Shared layout used as base for CMS UI views
> │   └── edit.tsx         ← Component used for /edit and all subpaths
> └── index.ts             ← Entry point where `config.registerRoute()` is called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
│   ├── layout.tsx
│   └── edit.tsx
└── index.ts
```

Author: I think this is useful...

Reviewer: It's useful, yes, but it has shortcomings. ASCII art diagrams with narrative text work against people with visual impairments. Code blocks don't index in search engines well, and might not get translated correctly. The explanations are sentence fragments and may be difficult to interpret in other languages.

Splitting the narrative text from the diagram has none of those shortcomings.

```

> 

Reviewer: This is more accessible.

```suggestion

In `@plone/cmsui/`, each of the files shown in the above diagram performs a specific function.

-   {file}`routes/layout.tsx` serves as a shared layout used as a base for CMS UI views.
-   {file}`routes/edit.tsx` is the component used for `/edit` and all its subpaths.
-   {file}`index.ts` is the entry point that calls `config.registerRoute()`.

```

Author: how?

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description": "How to create a route in Seven"
    "property=og:description": "How to create a route in Seven"
    "property=og:title": "How to create a route in Seven"
    "keywords": "Seven, frontend, Plone, routes"
---

# Create a route in Seven

In Seven, you register routes in the configuration registry via your add-on.

> ### Conventions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conventions
```

To promote clarity and modularity, **place all route components for your add-on in a {file}`routes` directory** at the root of your add-on.

The `file` property in each route must be a **fully qualified module path**—for example, `@my-addon/routes/MyView.tsx`—so that the application can resolve and load the component correctly at runtime.

> ### Route definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Route definition
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This section describes the parts that comprise and define a route.
```

See the {ref}`route-registration-api-reference` for the complete API reference.

`type`
:   The type of route to create.

>     It can be one of `route`, `index`, `layout`, or `prefix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It can be one of `route`, `index`, `layout`, or `prefix`.
    It is required.
```

`path`
:   The path for the route.

>     It is a string that defines the URL pattern for the route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It is a string that defines the URL pattern for the route.
    Either `path` or `file`, or both, is required.
```

`file`
:   The fully qualified path to the component file that will be rendered for this route.
    It is a string that specifies the location of the component file.

>     It must be a valid module path that can be resolved at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It must be a valid module path that can be resolved at runtime.
    Either `path` or `file`, or both, is required.
```

`options`
:   An optional object that can contain additional properties for the route.

>     It can include properties like `id`, `index`, and `caseSensitive`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It can have properties, such as `id`, `index`, or `caseSensitive`.
```

`children`
:   An optional array of child routes.
    It is an array of route definitions that can be nested within the parent route.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

-   a `prefix` route type whose path is `edit`; is a child of the `layout` route type; and is a parent, grouping all `/edit/*` paths, of two children route types
-   an `index` route type as a child of `/edit`
-   a `route` route type as a child of `/edit`, where, by virtue of its wildcard path (`*`), resolves all non-index subpaths of `/edit/*`

```{note}
In the above example, both the `index` and `route` route types use the same file.
It's a convenient pattern, but one that might not always be useful.
```

### File structure of `@plone/cmsui` edit route

The following diagram illustrates the file structure of the `@plone/cmsui` edit route.

```text
@plone/cmsui/
├── routes/
│   ├── layout.tsx
│   └── edit.tsx
└── index.ts
```

In `@plone/cmsui/`, each of the files shown in the above diagram performs a specific function.

-   {file}`routes/layout.tsx` serves as a shared layout used as a base for CMS UI views.
-   {file}`routes/edit.tsx` is the component used for `/edit` and all its subpaths.
-   {file}`index.ts` is where the default configuration loader of the add-on calls `config.registerRoute()`.

(route-registration-api-reference)=

## Route registration API reference

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following type describes the API of route registration.

```

-   a wildcard route for any `/edit/*` subpath

```{note}

> In this example, both the `index` and `*` routes use the same file, because we want be reused in both scenarios, but this doesn't have to be the case always.

Author: Applied the suggestion manually.
